MantisBT Release Notes

1.2.10 Maintenance Release (2012-04-01)
-------------------------------------------------

MantisBT 1.2.10 is a maintenance release. All installations that are currently
running any 1.2.x version are advised to upgrade to this release.

A full changelog for the 1.2.x series can be found on the official site. [1]


1.2.9 Maintenance Release (2012-03-03)
-------------------------------------------------

MantisBT 1.2.9 release delivers 92 fixes and improvements including security
fixes, new MantisBT logo, MantisTouch integration, MS SQL fixes, SOAP API
improvements, and others.  We recommend that all instances be upgraded to this
release.

A full changelog for the 1.2.x series can be found on the official site. [1]


1.2.8 Security Release (2011-09-05)
-------------------------------------------------

MantisBT 1.2.8 is a security update for the stable 1.2.x branch. All
installations that are currently running any 1.2.x version are advised to
upgrade to this release.

Paulino Calderon from Websec, High-Tech Bridge Security Research Lab and Paul
Richards discovered 3 vulnerabilities:
 - 1x local file inclusion (LFI)/directory traversal
 - 2x cross site scriptin (XSS)

These vulnerabilities could have very severe consequences for users of
MantisBT, particularly as a result of the local file inclusion vulnerability.
If an attacker can upload their own PHP script to the server as an attachment,
they may be able to execute this script using the LFI vulnerability.

Refer to issues #13191 and #13281 for detailed information.

A full changelog for the 1.2.x series can be found on the official site. [1]


1.2.7 Security Release (2011-08-19)
-------------------------------------------------

MantisBT 1.2.7 is a security update for the stable 1.2.x branch. All
installations that are currently running any 1.2.x version are advised to
upgrade to this release.

Net.Edit0r from BlACK Hat Group posted a vulnerability report for an XSS issue
in search.php. All MantisBT users (including anonymous users that are not
logged in to public bug trackers) could be impacted by this vulnerability.
Refer to issue #13245 for full details.

This release also contains numerous minor bug fixes to MantisBT and improved
translations in many languages.

A full changelog for the 1.2.x series can be found on the official site. [1]


1.2.6 Maintenance Release (2011-07-26)
-------------------------------------------------

MantisBT 1.2.6 is a maintenance update for the stable 1.2.x branch. It is
recommended that all MantisBT users (including those still using 1.1.x or
earlier versions) upgrade to this latest release.

This release brings bug fixes and improvements across a range of MantisBT
features, especially the SOAP API, authentication, time tracking, and
billing areas. Documentation and translation updates are also included.

A full changelog for the 1.2.x series can be found on the official site. [1]


1.2.5 Maintenance Release (2011-04-05)
-------------------------------------------------

MantisBT 1.2.5 is a maintenance update for the stable 1.2.x branch. It is
recommended that all MantisBT users (including those still using 1.1.x or
earlier versions) upgrade to this latest release.

This release brings improved translations in many languages as well as
numerous bug fixes across a range of MantisBT features.

A full changelog for the 1.2.x series can be found on the official site. [1]


1.2.4 Security Release (2010-12-15)
-------------------------------------------------

MantisBT 1.2.4 is a security update for the stable 1.2.x branch. All
installations that are currently running any 1.2.x version are advised to
upgrade to this release.

Gjoko Krstic of Zero Science Lab reported multiple vulnerabilities in the
admin/upgrade_unattended.php script. Issue #12607 provides more detail on the
vulnerabilities discovered. We thank Gjoko for his detailed assistance with
testing, patching and answering questions. Please note that the /admin/
directory should be removed from all MantisBT installations after the
installation or upgrade has been completed. This is particularly true for
MantisBT installations accessible over the Internet.

Also included with 1.2.4 are some bug fixes relating to fonts in the
MantisGraph plugin, SOAP API, CSV export, custom field values, relationship
graphs, fields on the manage user page, built-in time tracking and the
allow_reporter_close feature. This release includes updated translations for
many languages and improved installation documentation in doc/INSTALL.

A full changelog for the 1.2.x series can be found on the official site. [1]


1.2.3 Security Release (2010-09-14)
-------------------------------------------------

MantisBT 1.2.3 is a security update for the stable 1.2.x branch. All
installations that are currently running any 1.2.x version are advised to
upgrade to this release.

Issue #12312 covers an XSS vulnerability in the upstream NuSOAP library.
The fix has been applied to the library included in MantisBT releases, and a
patch has been submitted upstream for future releases of NuSOAP. See
http://www.mantisbt.org/bugs/view.php?id=12312 for further details.

Also included with 1.2.3 are another round of XSS fixes to MantisBT, improved
excel export, translation updates, and bug fixes to the SOAP API, installation,
plugin system, and email notifications.

A full changelog for the 1.2.x series can be found on the official site. [1]


1.2.2 Security Release (2010-07-29)
-------------------------------------------------

MantisBT 1.2.2 is a security update for the stable 1.2.x branch. All
installations that are currently running any 1.2.x version are advised to
upgrade to this release.

Issue #11952 covers a security fix to the display of inline attachments, where
"Arbitrary inline attachment rendering could lead to cross-domain scripting or
other browser attacks".  See http://www.mantisbt.org/bugs/view.php?id=11952
for further details and information.

Also included with 1.2.2 are a range of translation updates, regression fixes,
and bug fixes, including multiple SOAP API-related bugs and regressions.

A full changelog for the 1.2.x series can be found on the official site. [1]


1.2.1 Maintenance Release (2010-04-23)
-------------------------------------------------

MantisBT 1.2.1 is a maintenance update for the stable 1.2.x branch. All
installations that are currently running any 1.1.x or 1.2.0 version are
advised to upgrade to this release.

Included with 1.2.1 are a range of bug fixes, translation updates, and general
improvements over the initial 1.2.0 release.  Highlights include an improved
installation, a fixed upgrade path from 1.1.x, fixes to the URL and path
detection, and updates to the plugin event system.

A full changelog for the 1.2.x series can be found on the official site. [1]


1.2.0 Stable Release (2010-02-22)
-------------------------------------------------

This release marks the first official release in the 1.2.x series of MantisBT.
1.2.0 is a major feature release for MantisBT, and includes many bugfixes and
enhancements over the 1.1.x stable branch.  All users of 1.1.x are highly
encouraged to upgrade as soon as possible.

There are many new features added to 1.2.0, including:

 - Converted the MantisBT Manual to Docbook format, and added a new Developer's
   Guide manual, both of which are compiled and included in every release

 - Implemented a plugin system with many plugins already released [2]

 - Global categories available to all projects, as well as project categories
   inheriting from parent projects to child projects;  both are optional

 - Tracked change history for textarea fields (Description, etc) and bug notes

 - Customizable sets of columns for View Issues page and export formats

 - Combined simple and advanced views into a single, configurable view that
   allows selecting exactly what fields to show or hide

 - Improved roadmap and changelog pages, including version release dates, and
   permalinks to individual versions

 - Marking versions as obsolete to hide them from the roadmap and changelog

 - More configuration options for rebranding MantisBT installations

 - Improved support for PostgreSQL databases

 - Improved support for UTF-8 localizations and content

 - Implemented custom search providers for Firefox and Internet Explorer

 - Implemented localized timestamps using according to user-preferred timezones


There have also been many improvements to the codebase beyond adding features:

 - Migrated to parameterised database queries throughout the codebase for both
   performance and security improvements

 - Added PHPDoc compatible documentation to all internal API's

 - Removed many hardcoded references to access levels and other enumerations,
   for improved customizability.

 - Migrated away from DATETIME fields to integer timestamps for timezone usage

 - All 3rd party code is now contained within the library/ path, including
   documentation on library versions and any patches applied

 - Initial support for MySQL 6 and PHP 5.3


[1] The changelog is split between multiple releases:

	1.2.8      http://www.mantisbt.org/bugs/changelog_page.php?version_id=139
	1.2.7      http://www.mantisbt.org/bugs/changelog_page.php?version_id=138
	1.2.6      http://www.mantisbt.org/bugs/changelog_page.php?version_id=114
	1.2.5      http://www.mantisbt.org/bugs/changelog_page.php?version_id=113
	1.2.4      http://www.mantisbt.org/bugs/changelog_page.php?version_id=112
	1.2.3      http://www.mantisbt.org/bugs/changelog_page.php?version_id=111
	1.2.2      http://www.mantisbt.org/bugs/changelog_page.php?version_id=110
	1.2.1      http://www.mantisbt.org/bugs/changelog_page.php?version_id=109
	1.2.0      http://www.mantisbt.org/bugs/changelog_page.php?version_id=108
	1.2.0rc2   http://www.mantisbt.org/bugs/changelog_page.php?version_id=106
	1.2.0rc1   http://www.mantisbt.org/bugs/changelog_page.php?version_id=98
	1.2.0a3    http://www.mantisbt.org/bugs/changelog_page.php?version_id=104
	1.2.0a2    http://www.mantisbt.org/bugs/changelog_page.php?version_id=96
	1.2.0a1    http://www.mantisbt.org/bugs/changelog_page.php?version_id=89

[2] GitHub is now the preferred code collaboration site for MantisBT,
	including the official MantisBT repository and a MantisBT-plugins
	organisation which is used to host repositories of community plugins.

    https://github.com/mantisbt
    https://github.com/mantisbt-plugins
